---
published: true
layout: post
title: Trapped Miner in Probabilistic Programming Implemented in OCaml
date: 2017-11-19
excerpt: A recursive implementation of a problem in foundation of computer science (trapped miner) as a probabilistic program in OCaml.
categories:
  - Functional Programming
  - Probabilistic Programming
  - Foundation of Computer Science
tags:
  - probabilistic programming
  - trapped miner
  - resource bound analysis
  - OCaml programming
comments: true
---

## Introduction 

This post shows how a common problem in Computer Science-- Trapper Miner-- can be 
implementd in OCaml as a recursive probabilistic program. 

We consider a miner who is trapped in a mine. The miner is sent to the mine for $$n$$ times independently, for each time, with probability $$\frac{1}{2}$$ he is trapped and with the same probability he is safe. When he is trapped, there are `3` doors in the mine for using. The first door leads to a tunnel that will take him to safety after `3` hours (representing by `3` `ticka`). The second door leads to a tunnel that returns him to the mine after `5` hours. And the third door leads to a tunnel that returns him to the mine after `7` hours. At all times, the miner is equally likely to choose any one of the doors, meaning that he chooses any door with equivalent probability $$\frac{1}{3}$$. 

This is a common problem in a course of foundation of Computer Science. What we are interested in here is what is the number of hours that the miner needs 
to take to reach safety in average for $$n$$ independent times.  

Let's consider the manual way to compute expected time the miner reaches safety for $n$ independent times. Let $$X_i$$ be the random variable representing the miner escape time in the $$i^{th}$$ time and let $$X = X_1 + \cdots + X_n$$, we are asking for $$\mathbb{E}[X]$$. We first need to use the **law of total expectation** to calculate $$\expt{}{X_i}$$. 
Let $$A$$ be the event that the miner is trapped then $$\mathbb{E}[X_i] = \mathbb{E}[X_i|A]{\cdot}\mathbb{P}(A) + 0{\cdot}\mathbb{P}(\neg A) = \frac{1}{2}{\cdot}\mathbb{E}[X_i|A]$$. Now use again the law of total expectation to calculate $$\mathbb{E}[X_i|A]$$, 
let $$B$$ be the event that the miner reaches safety in the first try, then we have $$\mathbb{E}[X_i|A] = \mathbb{E}[(X_i|A)|B]{\cdot}\mathbb{P}(B) + \mathbb{E}[(X_i|A)| \neg B]{\cdot}\mathbb{P}(\neg B) = 3{\cdot}\frac{1}{3} + (5{\cdot}\frac{1}{2} + 7{\cdot}\frac{1}{2} + \mathbb{E}[X_i|A]){\cdot}\frac{2}{3} = 5 + \frac{2}{3}{\cdot}\mathbb{E}[X_i|A]$$, thus $$\mathbb{E}[X_i|A] = 15$$. 

Finally, by linearity of expectation, we get $$\mathbb{E}[X] = \sum^{n}_{i=1}\mathbb{E}[X_i] = \frac{15}{2}{\cdot}n$$ if $$n > 0$$, $$0$$ otherwise.
 
As we have shown in the above reasoning process, the manual method involves many heuristic theorems and techniques in probability theory and algebra. As a result, it is very hard or impossible to automate.

## Implementation

```ocaml
let rec biased_rw n counter =
   let () = assert (n >= 0) in match n with
   | 0 -> (0, counter)
   | _ -> 
    let r = Random.int 100 in
    (* encode the probability 2/3 *)
    if (r < 67) then 
        biased_rw (n-1) (counter+1) 
    else 
        biased_rw (n+1) (counter+1)

(* testing function *)
let test nr f n =
   let rt = ref 0 in
   for i = 1 to nr do
      let (_,cost) = f n 0 in
      rt := (!rt) + cost
   done; 
   (float_of_int (!rt)) /. (float_of_int nr)
```
The following are the average values of `counter` when we run `biased_rw` for `10000` times.

```ocaml
# test 10000 biased_rw 10;;
- : float = 29.472
```

[1]: http://channgo2203.github.io/zips/tool_benchmark.zip
